# Introduction

![The Rust Logo](./assets/concept.svg)

The landscape of software development is both vast and intricate, dotted with
countless tools and frameworks that rise as answers to the ever-present
challenges faced by developers. Yet, amidst this vastness, finding a tool that
truly resonates with one's philosophies can be like searching for a needle in a
haystack. Such was the experience that led to the creation of `surreal_orm`.

After delving into over ten ORM solutions in Rust alone and journeying through
more than twenty across languages such as TypeScript, Python, Java, Ruby,
Elixir, and more, it became starkly evident: while many tools cater to the basic
needs, very few strike the harmonious chord of simplicity, power, and
expressiveness. This realization wasn't just a mere observation—it was the
catalyst that inspired `surreal_orm`.

This book is not just an introduction to an ORM library; it's a narrative of a
journey, a testament to a set of deeply-held philosophies, and an exploration of
groundbreaking innovations:

1. **Expressive Yet Intuitive API**: Traditional ORMs often make complex queries
   convoluted and unreadable. `surreal_orm` challenges this norm. At the heart
   of `surreal_orm` lies an unwavering commitment to clarity. The belief is
   straightforward: if a query can be articulated in raw string format, it
   should be just as elegantly expressible within the ORM. This ensures that
   even as queries grow intricate, they remain legible, empowering developers to
   write intuitive code without sacrificing capability.

2. **Compile-Time Excellence**: Harnessing the full might of Rust's compile-time
   error checking, surreal_orm emphasizes robustness from the onset. From model
   declarations to query constructions, the goal is to catch potential pitfalls
   even before the code springs to life. And in scenarios where compile-time
   checks aren't feasible, surreal_orm employs meticulous runtime validations,
   standing as a testament to its commitment to reliability and safety.

3. **Pioneering Features**: `surreal_orm` introduces pioneering ideas that set
   it apart. From innovative macros such as `block!`, `transaction`, `object!`,
   `object_partial!`, and `cond!`, to compile-time validations of graph
   structures, and advanced features like deep graph access and
   auto-parametrized mathematical expressions—these are just a glimpse of the
   groundbreaking capabilities you'll encounter.

4. **Full Specification Support**: Beyond its intuitive design and innovative
   features, `surreal_orm` stands tall with its comprehensive support for the
   full specification. It's not just another ORM or query builder; it's a beacon
   of compliance and expressiveness in the ORM landscape.

As you delve deeper into these pages, you'll journey beyond the mechanics,
delving into the essence of `surreal_orm`—understanding its origins, the
problems it seeks to solve, and the philosophies that molded its creation. It's
a tale of refusing to settle, of reimagining boundaries, and of sculpting a
solution when none seemed just right.

Each chapter, carefully crafted by the very creator of `surreal_orm`, promises a
deep dive into its intricacies, philosophies, and innovations. So, whether
you're a seasoned Rust developer, an ORM enthusiast, or a curious soul eager to
explore the intersections of innovation and software development, this book
promises a voyage into the heart of data management with a fresh perspective in
Rust—a realm where convention meets innovation, culminating in the creation of
something truly surreal.

-- © Oyelowo Oyedayo, 2023.
